---
layout: post
title: Week 7
parent: GSoC '20
nav_order: 5
summary: Implementing corrected commit date offsets was a trial of tests and debugging.
---

# Week 7
{: .no_toc}

_As with any project, it is last 20% that takes up 80% of the time._

The statement could be not more accurate about my last week's work on corrected commit date offsets. The [patch](https://github.com/gitgitgadget/git/pull/676) is currently failing tests for t5324-split-commit-graph and t6600-test-reach but is ready for the first round of review. 

1. Table of Contents
{:toc .text_delta}

## Overview

I started a mega patch that:
1. Implemented generation data chunk.
2. Implemented corrected commit date offsets.
3. Re-used some pieces of code.
4. Fixed performance regression for computing bloom filters.

The tests failed (because of course, they would). I spent a day chasing bugs around on gdb (which I have learned to use well and look forward to reading [Stallman's book](https://www.amazon.com/Debugging-GDB-GNU-Source-Level-Debugger/dp/1882114884) after GSoC), but the number of point of failures were too many. These included:
1. Incorrectly computing corrected commit date offsets.
2. Incorrectly writing generation data chunk.
3. Incorrectly writing commit-graph.
4. Incorrectly reading commit-graph.
5. Incorrectly parsing generation data chunk.
6. Incorrectly traversing the graph.
7. No longer accurate tests (as it happened in t5000-tar-tree, t5318-commit-graph, and others).

And others too.

After getting frustrated over the lack of headway, I started to rewrite the changes in small, self-contained patches (which in hindsight, I should have done since the beginning). What was once a mess touching over 13 files now is neatly laid out in tiny morsels of code changes.

## Failed Tests

As I mentioned, the patch is failing tests for t5324-split-commit-graph and t6600-test-reach.

The failed test for test-reach is what I am working at the moment. We set a repository where commits are named in the form `commit-x-y` (where 1 <= x, y <= 10) and `commit-x-y` can reach `commit-i-j` if i <= x and j <= y.

We look up commits reachable from `commit-6-6` but not from `commit-3-8`. This would mean commits are of form `commit-i-j` where 3 < i <= 6 and 1 <= j <= 6.

While the tests pass for `--topo-order` and `--first-parent` individually, when we combine them together into `--topo-order --first-parent` rev-list inadvertently contains `commit-3-1` and `commit-2-1`.

## Future Plans

Here's what left for the patch series:
1. Add an option to skip writing generation data chunk (to test whether new Git works without GDAT as intended).
2. Handle writing to commit-graph for mismatched version (that is, merging all graphs into a new graph with a GDAT chunk).
3. Pass tests with `GIT_TEST_COMMIT_GRAPH=1`. More tests *might* fail as I fix the current tests.

I look forward to everyone's reviews!
